---
title: "MEDB 5505, Introduction to R, Module03, Homework"
---

### Assignments, due start of week 7

#### Hw03. 

Graded: 3 points, one point deducted if submitted late.

The oyster dataset shows two different computer vision methods that can be used to estimate oyster weight and oyster volume. Please consult the data dictionary (Links to an external site.) and then review the dataset itself (Links to an external site.). This is a fixed width file.

An experiment with litters of rats is described here (Links to an external site.) and the data is stored here (Links to an external site.). This is a comma separated text file. Read it into R and print the first six rows of data.

A study of diamond ring prices is described here (Links to an external site.) and the data is stored here (Links to an external site.). This is a fixed width text file. Read it into R and print the first six rows of data.
Note: I had originally described the oyster dataset as a tab delimited file. If you read it in as such, the results look on the face of it to be fine, but it actually does not allow you to analyze individual columns. I will not deduct any points if you read in the data as I had originally suggested. I have just fixed this (2021-04-04) so that the next batch of students will not be misled.

Submit your work [here][can1]

#### Discuss03. 

Graded: 3 points, one point deduction if submitted after the deadline.

Submit your comments [here]().

#### Quiz03

Graded: 3 points, one point deducted if submitted late.

[can1]: https://umkc.instructure.com/courses/65169/assignments/279194?module_item_id=830865
