---
title: "MEDB 5505, Introduction to R, Module02, Homework"
---

### Assignments, due start of week 5

#### Hw02a. 

Graded: 3 points, one point deducted if submitted late.

Download the the file module02-datasets.RData (Links to an external site.) and store it in the appropriate folder. Then run a program using Rmarkdown to answer the following questions.

Include both the question and your answer to the question in the Rmarkdown code. Submit your work as a single PDF file.

If there are errors or warnings in your output, send me PDF files of your code and your output by email and I will see if I can help.

Q1. Notice that there is a huge range in body weight. Display the rows in the data frame associated with the smallest and the largest mammals.

Q2. Which variables have missing data?

Q3. Calculate the mean and standard deviation for TotalSleep.

Submit your work [here][can1]

#### HW02b

Graded: 3 points, one point deducted if submitted late.

Download the the file module02-datasets.RData (Links to an external site.) and store it in the appropriate folder. Then run a program using Rmarkdown to answer the following questions.

Include both the question and your answer to the question in the Rmarkdown code. Submit your work as a single PDF file.

If there are errors or warnings in your output, send me PDF files of your code and your output by email and I will see if I can help.

Q1. Draw a histogram for total sleep and life span. Would a normal distribution (bell shaped curve) be a fair representation of the distribution of either variable?

Suggestion: a smaller number of bins, maybe 10 or 15 works a lot better than the default of 30 bins.

Q2. Do animals who have high degrees of Predation, Exposure, or Danger sleep less? Show your results using a correlation coefficient and a plot with a trendline.

Submit your work [here][can2]


#### Discuss02. 

Graded: 3 points, one point deduction if submitted after the due date.

Review the videos in this section and answer the following questions.

1. What was the most important thing you learned.

2. What did you find confusing.

3. What would you like to see covered next.

It is okay to use short answers like "Nothing was confusing" or "Everything was confusing." You can also briefly concur with a previous student's comments.

Submit your comments [here][can3].

[can1]: https://umkc.instructure.com/courses/65169/assignments/279193?module_item_id=830857
[can2]: https://umkc.instructure.com/courses/65169/assignments/306536?module_item_id=911168
[can3]: https://umkc.instructure.com/courses/65169/discussion_topics/237548?module_item_id=830856
