---
title: "MEDB 5510, Clinical Research Methodology, Module05, Videos"
---

### Readings and Resources

Handouts associated with the videos are draft only at this point. They will be finalized on or before noon on 2022-02-16 (Wednesday).

+ Required reading
  + Chapters 5, 6 of Gliner, Morgan, and Leech.

+ Recommended reading
  + See the [recommended reading page][git2] on my github site.

+ Handouts associated with videos
  + Video05. Quasi-experimental designs. Slides and speaker notes available in [pdf format][git1]

### Videos

I plan to review the videos from last year and either re-use them or re-record them. You will get live links to these videos on or before 5pm on 2022-02-18 (Friday).

There are 6 videos with a total of about 92 minutes.

+ Videos to be recorded

  + V05-01, Definition of quality improvement studies (about 12 minutes)
  + V05-02, Framework for quality improvement studies (about 12 minutes)
  + V05-03, Fishbone diagrams (about 9 minutes)
  + V05-04, Pareto charts (about 5 minutes)
  + V05-05, Quasi-experimental studies (about 20 minutes)
  + V05-06, Time series designs (about 8 minutes)
  + V05-07, Withdrawal designs (about 7 minutes)
  + V05-08, Review of homework assignments (about 7 minutes)

For archival purposes, I am including a [page with links to video recordings][git0] done back in 2019, 2020, and 2021. You do not need to watch these, and you probably do not want to watch them. I am putting them here because I want to eventually turn the content of these videos into a book about research methods.

### Active Learning

Handouts associated with the videos are draft only at this point. They will be finalized on or before noon on 2022-02-16 (Wednesday).

There is

+ a discussion board,
+ a short quiz, and
+ a homework assignment

available on the Canvas website.

[git0]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/modules/5510-99-videos.md
[git1]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/results/video05-slides-and-speaker-notes.pdf
[git2]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/modules/5510-99-readings.md
