---
title: "MEDB 5510, Clinical Research Methodology, Module07, Videos"
---

### Readings and Resources

Handouts associated with the videos are draft only at this point. They will be finalized on or before noon on 2022-03-02 (Wednesday).

+ Required reading
  + Chapter 7 of Gliner, Morgan, and Leech.

+ Recommended reading
  + See the [recommended reading page][git2] on my github site.

+ Handouts associated with videos
  + Video07. Observational research. Slides and speaker notes available in [pdf format][git1]

### Videos

I plan to review the videos from last year and either re-use them or re-record them. You will get live links to these videos on or before 5pm on 2022-03-04 (Friday).

There are 8 videos with a total of about 105 minutes.

+ Videos to be recorded
  + V06-09, Confusion about observational designs (about 16 minutes)
  + V06-10, Establishing causation for an observational design (about 42 minutes)
  + V06-11, Qualitative research, phenomenological framework (about 11 minutes)
  + V06-12, Grounded theory (about 4 minutes)
  + V06-13, Ethnography (about 4 minutes)
  + V06-14, The case study (about 4 minutes)
  + V06-15, Narrative (about 4 minutes)
  + V06-16, Community based participatory research (about 13 minutes)

For archival purposes, I am including a [page with links to video recordings][git0] done back in 2019, 2020, and 2021. You do not need to watch these, and you probably do not want to watch them. I am putting them here because I want to eventually turn the content of these videos into a book about research methods.

### Active Learning

Links to the assignments will be finalized on or before noon on 2022-03-02 (Wednesday).

There is

+ a discussion board,
+ a short quiz, and
+ a homework assignment

available on the Canvas website.

[git0]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/modules/5510-99-videos.md
[git1]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/results/video06-slides-and-speaker-notes.pdf
[git2]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/modules/5510-99-readings.md
