---
title: "MEDB 5510, Clinical Research Methodology, Module03, Videos"
---

### Readings and Resources

+ Required reading
  + Chapter 2 of Gliner, Morgan, and Leech.

+ Recommended reading
  + See the recommended reading page on my github site.

Handouts are in draft form. I hope to finalize them by 2022-02-02 (Wednesday) at noon.

+ Handouts associated with videos
  + Video03. Literature review. Slides and speaker notes available in [pdf format][git1]

### Videos

I plan to review the videos from last year and either re-use them or re-record them. You will get live links to these videos on or before 5pm on 2022-02-04 (Friday).

There are 6 videos with a total of about 92 minutes.

+ Videos to be recorded
  + V03-01, What is a literature review (about 10 minutes)
  + V03-02, Finding articles (about 31 minutes)
  + V03-03, Analyzing articles (about 10 minutes)
  + V03-04, Evaluating articles (about 16 minutes)
  + V03-05, Organizing your literature review (about 11 minutes)
  + V03-06, Reviewing your homework for this module (about 14 minutes)

For archival purposes, I am including a [page with links to video recordings][git0] done back in 2019, 2020, and 2021. You do not need to watch these, and you probably do not want to watch them. I am putting them here because I want to eventually turn the content of these videos into a book about research methods.

### Active Learning

There is

+ a discussion board,
+ a short quiz, and
+ a homework assignment

available on the Canvas website.

[git0]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/modules/5510-99-videos.md
[git1]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/results/video04-slides-and-speaker-notes.pdf
