---
title: "MEDB 5510, Clinical Research Methodology, Module13 Videos"
---

Note that I am including some recordings done back in 2019. You do not need to watch these, and you probably do not want to watch them. I am putting them here because I want to eventually turn the content of these videos into a book about research methods. Students who attended the live lecture on Wednesday do not have to view either recording, unless they want to.

### Readings and Resources

+ Required reading
  + Chapter 8 of Gliner, Morgan, and Leech.

+ Recommended reading
  + See the recommended reading page on my github site.

Handouts are in draft form. I hope to finalize them by 2022-03-09 (Wednesday) at noon.

+ Handouts associated with videos
  + Video11. Data management. Slides and speaker notes available in [pdf format][git1]

### Videos

I plan to review the videos from last year and either re-use them or re-record them. You will get live links to these videos on or before 5pm on 2022-03-11 (Friday).

There are 7 videos with a total of about 153 minutes.

+ Videos to be recorded
  + V13-01, Scales of measurement (about 17 minutes)
  + V13-02, Descriptive statistics (about 39 minutes)
  + V13-03, Linear regression (about 21 minutes)
  + V13-04, Logistic and Poisson regression (about 30 minutes)
  + V13-05, Cox regression, longitudinal/hierarchical designs (about 26 minutes)
  + V13-06, Qualitative analysis methods (about 15 minutes)
  + V13-07, Writing a methods section (about 11 minutes)
