---
title: "MEDB 5510, Clinical Research Methodology, Module06, Videos"
---

### Readings and Resources

+ Required reading
  + Chapter 7 of Gliner, Morgan, and Leech.

+ Recommended reading
  + See the recommended reading page on my github site.

Handouts are in draft form. I hope to finalize them by 2022-03-02 (Wednesday) at noon.

+ Handouts associated with videos
  + Video06. Observational research. Slides and speaker notes available in [pdf format][git1]

### Videos

I plan to review the videos from last year and either re-use them or re-record them. You will get live links to these videos on or before 5pm on 2022-03-04 (Friday).

There are 8 videos with a total of about 105 minutes.

+ Videos to be recorded

  + V06-01, Secondary data analysis (about 29 minutes)
  + V06-02, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (about 17 minutes)
  + V06-03, Bureau of the Census (about 16 minutes)
  + V06-04, Cohort designs (about 17 minutes)
  + V06-05, Case-control designs (about 10 minutes)
  + V06-06, Cross-sectional designs (about 7 minutes)
  + V06-07, Historical control designs (4 minutes)
  + V06-08, Your homework (about 5 minutes).

For archival purposes, I am including a [page with links to video recordings][git0] done back in 2019, 2020, and 2021. You do not need to watch these, and you probably do not want to watch them. I am putting them here because I want to eventually turn the content of these videos into a book about research methods.

### Active Learning

There is

+ a discussion board,
+ a short quiz, and
+ a homework assignment

available on the Canvas website.

[git0]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/modules/5510-99-videos.md
[git1]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/clinical-research-methodology/results/video06-slides-and-speaker-notes.pdf
