---
title: MEDB 5501, Applied Biostatistics I syllabus
---

### Course instructors

-   Suman Sahil
    -   816-235-1812
    -   sumans@umkc.edu
    
-   Steve Simon
    -   Phone: 816-235-6617
    -   E-mail: simons@umkc.edu 

-   Office Hours: By appointment
    -   Appointments will be via Zoom or face-to-face in one of our offices. Email is the method to contact us for the fastest response.
    -   Both of our offices are located in the Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, School of Medicine, M5-100. 

### Prerequisites

-   Undergraduate students or students without a Bachelor’s Degree from an accredited 4 year University are not permitted to register for this course.
-   To register for this class, you need to have received acceptance into
    -   the Bioinformatics MS, IPhD Program, or Certificate in Clinical Research Program.
    -   a UMKC Post-graduate Professional Program.
    -   a UMKC Graduate (Post-Baccalaureate) Program.
    -   the UMKC Schools of Medicine, Dentistry, or Nursing.
    -   another similar programs but from another institution.
    -   a graduate level visiting student (Non-Degree Seeking).

### Required Email

All students MUST use their UMKC email or the Canvas email system for all course related communications. A personal email account may not be used for any course communications.

### Required Textbook

-   Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics North American Edition: 5th Edition. Andy Field. Sage Publications. ISBN-13: 9781526436566.

Although this book shows examples using IBM SPSS Statistics, you will be able to use whatever statistical software you prefer. Course instructions will be in R and R Studio.

### Course Description

#### Introduction

Clinical research has been critical for the development of new medications and treatments. Now, clinical research carries an increasingly important role as it contributes to critical issues facing our health care system. In order for clinical research to address these issues and others, appropriate methods for data processing and analysis must be conducted. The DBHI Biostatistics sequence is designed to provide students the knowledge and skills they will need in order to contribute to the creation, analysis, and understanding of data generated by clinical and patient care studies. Additionally, continuing medical education (CME) requires the reading and understanding of current medical literature.  Knowledge of Statistics plays an integral role in the reading, assessment, and understanding of medical literature.

#### Course Characteristics

This 3-credit hour course is the first course in the Biostatistics sequence and is intended for students, physicians, and researchers in the biological, clinical and medical fields. It will introduce statistical concepts, analysis methods, and research designs for applied data commonly encountered in the biological, clinical and medical research. Topics include an introduction to the use of SPSS, types of data, descriptive statistics, illustrative statistics, principles in sampling, hypothesis testing, parametric analysis concepts and techniques, nonparametric analysis concepts and techniques, correlation, and linear regression. Familiarity with basic statistics is not required. Statistical analyses involved in this course will be performed primarily using the SPSS statistical analysis package. Students can opt to use SAS for analysis however SAS will not be taught in this course. The student using SAS must have a working knowledge of SAS. The course will also cover the presentation of analytical results and graphic representation of data.

#### Course Goals

The Biostatistics sequence will provide students with an understanding of basic and more advanced concepts in statistics as applied to health sciences. The goal of this course is to equip students with knowledge of the basic statistical methods needed for designing studies and analyzing data from biomedical, clinical, and public health research studies. This course should provide students a foundation for evaluating outcomes of medical and clinical research as well as prepare them to be more critical consumers of the health research literature. This course should also provide a firm foundation for more advanced and specialized statistical analysis course work if pursued. 

#### Student Learning Objectives

-   Have knowledge of definitions necessary to understand basic bio-statistical concepts and procedures presented in this course.
-   Understand basic concepts including, but not limited to, data types, data scales, data distributions, measures of central tendency, measures of variability, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, p values, effect size, critical values, power, and sample size. 
-   Understand and implement graphic representation of data 
-   Manage and analyze data sets using SPSS in order to test research hypotheses
-   Estimate and summarize data characteristics in order to determine appropriate statistical analysis methods
-   Apply statistical methods for analyzing continuous data (parametric statistical methods)
-   Apply statistical methods for analyzing categorical and ordinal data (nonparametric statistical methods)
-   Apply the statistical knowledge gained in this course in a practical manner
-   Use R or other statistical software to manage and analyze data
-   Be prepared for MEDB 5502 Biostatistics II or other advanced statistics classes

#### Course Framework

There are three sections of this course, Synchronous Zoom presentation, Asynchronous Online presentation, and International student.

**Synchronous Zoom** (section 0001): Students will attend Synchronous Zoom sessions scheduled every Tuesday from 1pm to 3:45pm.

**Asynchronous Online** (section 0002): Students will view recordings from the synchronous Zoom sessions.The recordings from the synchronous Zoom session will be available every Wednesday at noon.

**International students** (section 0003): Students will attend Synchronous Zoom sessions scheduled every Tuesday from 1pm to 3:45pm. In addition, students will sign an attendance sheet in the Biomedical and Health Informatics office, held by Ricardo Moniz. This is intended to meet the needs of some international students who have to demonstrate that most of their instruction is on-site. Consult with the International Student Affairs Office if you are unsure about your requirements. This section is not limited to only international students, but there is no difference between this section and the synchronous zoom session other than the attendance sheet.

All sections will have access to the same videos, quizzes, discussion boards, and programming assignments. If you prefer to move to a different section, you can do this formally. You are also welcome to switch in a given week from synchronous to asynchronous or vice versa. You do not need to notify me or anyone else about a temporary shift.


All students are responsible for meeting all deadlines, completing all assigned readings and assignments, exams, quizzes and successfully executing the semester project.

All students enrolled in the online section will be welcomed and encouraged to “attend” the Zoom synchronous course presentations should their schedule and time permit. The recordings from the synchronous Zoom session will be available every Wednesday at noon.

### Course Policies

#### Attendance 

Synchronous Zoom and International Student Sections: Classroom activities are designed to build on and extend the basic information available from textbooks. In order to benefit from these sessions, you are required to attend all Synchronous Zoom sessions. In case of an unavoidable absence, please notify the course director. It is the student's responsibility to make up for activities and assignments missed during an excused absence.  No assignments will be accepted for unexcused absences. This includes the assignment due on the day of the unexcused absence and the assignment made the day of the unexcused absence. Unexcused absences beyond 20% (3 class sessions) of the course will result in course failure. The instructor will accommodate excused absences to the extent that an accommodation can be made that does not unreasonably interfere with the learning objectives of the course or unduly burden the instructor and/ or the other enrolled students in the course. Attendance policies will be applied in a non-discriminatory manner. Course materials and lectures are provided on Canvas.

International Students must attend weekly in person attendance checks. 

Asynchronous Online: This is an independent, asynchronous Online, asynchronous course section. Teaching and learning activities occur asynchronously Online through the use of a variety of eLearning technologies and resources. While there is no required Synchronous Zoom meeting, your “presence” in the course each week is required – this course has defined deadlines for viewing of Panapto videos, completion of assignments and other course related activities. Course materials and lectures are provided on Canvas.

#### Promptness

As a courtesy to faculty and classmates, please be prompt to all Synchronous Zoom sessions.

#### Participation

The Synchronous Zoom class is designed to be participatory. All students are expected to be prepared prior to the class meeting. Learning activities in this course are designed to enhance your understanding of concepts.  It is expected that each student will be prepared to participate in a professional manner in all zoom discussions.

#### Assignments

You are responsible for all reading assignments in the course text and handouts.  Focus on learning key concepts and terminology from the reading assignments in advance of the classroom period. Additionally, it is expected that students at the graduate level will use independent initiative to find readings beyond those assigned to further their knowledge if needed. Students are expected to do their own work on graded assignments. Any evidence of shared work (unless otherwise assigned as such), cheating or plagiarism on any project assigned as an individual graded assignment will result in a grade of "0" for that event. Assignments will be assessed for similarity (past and present).

#### Assistance

The format of the Synchronous Zoom sessions will be presentation/interactive. If you have questions, please ask them during the class period.  If there is something you don't understand, others will likely have that as a question, too.  If you feel the need for more in-depth assistance, make an appointment to meet at a time outside of class with the instructor or attend the Weekly Help Session.

#### Exams

Any behavior that intends to gain unfair advantage in an academic situation is unacceptable.  Any cheating on examinations or plagiarism on any project will result in a grade of "0" for that event with a formal report made to the Chair of the department of Biomedical and Health Informatics and the Dean of Graduate Studies and submitted to the Advanced Education Committee.

Make-up examinations will be given at the discretion of the course director, but only in case of emergency. Otherwise, missed examinations will be assigned a grade of zero.  Documentation supporting the emergency may be requested by the director.

All students (Synchronous Zoom and Asynchronous Online) will take exams on the scheduled day unless otherwise arranged with the course instructor.

#### Canvas

All students are required to use the course site on Canvas in order to have access to all course related materials. Canvas can be accessed at Login with your UMKC SSO and the course should appear on your homepage.  DO NOT CONTACT THE INSTRUCTOR WITH TECHNOLOGY PROBLEMS.

Announcements pertaining to the course as well as schedule updates and modifications will be posted on the Canvas course site or via email. Information, Materials, and Assignments will be located in the appropriate Week by Week weekly folder. Many materials on the Canvas course site can be read, downloaded, and printed using a standard web browser. Some items may require Adobe Acrobat Reader for viewing. Adobe Acrobat reader can be downloaded for FREE from the [Adobe website][ado1].

[ado1]: http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html 

Files containing the materials for each week/session will be posted on Canvas be for the class. All students are responsible for having all materials available during the Synchronous Zoom class (downloaded or printed). 

The student may track his/her current grade (point total) by accessing the grade center on the Canvas course site. A Canvas App is available for cell phones and tablets. Obtain from the appropriate App store. Canvas assistance can be obtained via the Canvas Help Menu option

### Course Work

Synchronous Zoom and International Student Sections: All students are expected to complete the readings and view the videos prior to the weekly Synchronous Zoom session. Students must attend weekly Synchronous Zoom sessions, be prepared for discussion and complete and turn in all assigned work.

Asynchronous Online: All students are expected to complete the readings, watch the didactic videos, and complete and turn in all assigned work. All Asynchronous Online students may attend Synchronous Zoom sessions. Please alert the instructor when doing so.

All Students enrolled in MEDB5501 are required to complete assignments that are designed to provide them with the opportunity to apply the knowledge gained from the readings, discussion and lab work. The requirements for each assignment will be explained at the time they are assigned. All assignments will be due by the end of the week (Sunday at 11:59pm). All written assignments must be submitted electronically through Canvas by the date/time specified. Full credit can only be earned on assignments that are turned in by the date and time of the next class session (as specified in the course schedule) unless an alternative arrangement is made with the course instructor. Assignments can be turned in after the due date for partial credit. The maximum amount of possible credit for late assignments will be established for each assignment by the instructor. Assignments turned in  more than six days late will receive a score of 0.

Other methods of activity and assessment may be added to the course. Examples include discussion board activities, short student presentations (Peer Teaching), student led discussions and group work to name a few.

One analysis-based project will be assigned during the semester. Each student will be responsible for identifying a topic in a field relevant to the course and their area of interest.  Each student will generate or obtain a data set related to this topic. The project will include the analysis of this set of data using statistical analysis tests presented during this course. The student will “write up” the analysis as a “Introduction, Results and Data Analysis” section of a journal article. The student will receive a detailed set of instructions for this assignment. The outline for this project can be found on Page 14 (the last page) of this document.

Periodic quizzes may be given.  The purpose of the quizzes is to assure that the student is completing the course activities, assignments, and readings. 

The student will complete a midterm exam.  The midterm exam will provide an opportunity for the student to demonstrate what they have learned in the course thus far. The exam will require that the student conduct appropriate analyses to address a specified research question/hypothesis, document the results from the analysis output, and prepare a written interpretation of that analysis output. The midterm exam will include questions assessing the knowledge gained from this course thus far. 

The student will complete a final exam. The final exam will provide an opportunity for the student to demonstrate what they have learned in the course. The exam will require that the student conduct appropriate analyses to address a specified research question/hypothesis, document the results from the analysis output, and prepare a written interpretation of that analysis output. The final exam will include questions assessing the knowledge gained from this course. The final exam will be comprehensive, but with emphasis on material presented during the second half of the semester.  

All students (Synchronous Zoom, International Student and Asynchronous Online) will follow the weekly schedule.  All written assignments will be turned in via Canvas as a Word doc according to the dates given in the syllabus. The Final Project data set and the Final Project will be turned in via Canvas to the instructor on the specified dates.

### Required Technology

#### R and RStudio

This course will use R for lectures and programming assignments. You should install R and RStudio (an integrated development environment for R) on your local computer. Instructions on installation will be shared in the first week of classes.

Ambitious students may wish to use a different software system for their work. Any reasonable alternative system, such as Python, SAS, SPSS, or Stata is fine. You will not get any guidance in class, but you can ask questions about these programs at the help sessions or individually. 

If you have never used any statistical software before, we recommend that you use R. It is not as difficult as some claim, and you will have lots of examples to work from.

### Course Evaluation

#### Points

The number of assignments and the point totals may change, but this should be a reasonable approximation.

-   Approximately fifteen written assignments worth 10 points each
-   One semester project worth 75 points
-   Quizzes/Participation/Extra Credit/Additional Assignments to be determined, but not a major percentage of your total points.
-   One final exam worth 100 points
  
#### Grading

This course will use the following criteria in the assignment of letter grades:

```{}
A   94 -100
A-  90 - 93
B+  87 - 89
B   84 - 86
B-  80 - 83
C+  77 - 79
C   74 - 76
C-  70 - 73
D+  67 - 69
D   64 - 66
D-  60 - 63
F   Below 60
```

In the event a student would like to appeal a course grade they must follow the School of Medicine procedure for grade appeal for graduate courses, which is outlined in the [student handbook][stu1].

[stu1]: http://med.umkc.edu/councils/graduate/documents/

Grades will not be rounded up. For example, a numeric grade of 89.99% is a B+. Please do not request a rounding up of your grade.

### Department and University Policies

#### Academic Calendar

Students are encouraged to review [important add, drop or withdraw dates][reg1].

[reg1]: http://www.umkc.edu/registrar/acal.asp 

#### Academic Honesty

The Board of Curators of the University of Missouri recognizes that academic honesty is essential for the intellectual life of the University. Faculty members have a special obligation to expect high standards of academic honesty in all student work. Students have a special obligation to adhere to such standards. Academic dishonesty, including cheating, plagiarism or sabotage, is adjudicated through the University of Missouri Student Conduct Code and Rules of Procedures in Student Conduct Matters. 

Students enrolled in this course assume an obligation to behave in a manner compatible with the University's function as an educational institution as described in the University Collected Rules and Regulations, section 200.010 Standard of Student Conduct. Conduct for which students are subject to sanctions includes academic dishonesty, such as cheating, plagiarism, or sabotage. These are defined as follows: 

*"The term cheating includes but is not limited to: (i) use of any unauthorized assistance in taking quizzes, tests, or examinations; (ii) dependence upon the aid of sources beyond those authorized by the instructor in writing papers, preparing reports, solving problems, or carrying out other assignments; (iii) acquisition or possession without permission of tests or other academic material belonging to a member of the University faculty or staff; or (iv) knowingly providing any unauthorized assistance to another student on quizzes, tests, examinations, paper or any other course assignment."*

*"The term plagiarism includes, but is not limited to: (i) use by paraphrase or direct quotation of the published or unpublished work of another person without fully and properly crediting the author with footnotes, citations or bibliographical reference; (ii) unacknowledged use of materials prepared by another person or agency engaged in the selling of term papers or other academic materials; or (iii) unacknowledged use of original work/material that has been produced through collaboration with others without release in writing from collaborators. In addition, the Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics includes self-plagiarism in their definition of plagiarism. Self-plagiarism is reuse of an existing paper that has been submitted for credit in a different course without prior discussion and consent of the course director."* 

*"The term sabotage includes, but is not limited to, the unauthorized interference with, modification of, or destruction of the work or intellectual property of another member of the University community."*

To ensure academic integrity and prevent plagiarism, UMKC has purchased the Internet-based Turn It In. This site allows faculty and students to submit papers Asynchronous Online to examine a paper’s originality. The site compares submitted papers with several proprietary algorithm databases to check for plagiarism. The course director reserves the right to have student assignments reviewed on Turnitin.com in this course. Submissions will have all identifying information removed from the submission to ensure that each student’s rights are protected. The instructor also reserves the right to use publicly available search engines and information to validate the originality of submitted work.

**Addendum for programming assignments**: You are expected to write your own programs or modify programs that are provided for you in class. You may not ask other students in the class or anyone outside the class to write your programs or post a request on an Internet discussion board. You can search for information on the Internet and/or consult large language models like ChatGPT. If your program has an error and you do not know how to fix it, you can seek advice from the teachers of this class or other students in this class. Please acknowledge any Internet resources that you relied on or anyone who helped you fix an error.

#### Campus Safety

Please use the [UMKC Alert website][ale1] for information about inclement weather, mass notification, and emergency response guide.

[ale1]: http://www.umkc.edu/umkcalert/ 

#### Counseling and Health Services

UMKC students may experience many challenges in their lives while attending college – stress, depression, suicidality, trauma, relationship issues, health concerns, etc.  As your professor I care about your success and well-being, and want to make you aware of some helpful resources on campus. The [UMKC Counseling Center][cou1], located at 4825 Troost in Room 206, offers a wide range of supportive services to students. Appointments can be made by calling +1-816-235-1635. [UMKC Student Health and Wellness][stu2], located at 4825 Troost in Room 115, offers a full range of health care and promotion services.  Appointments can be scheduled Asynchronous Online or by calling +1-816-235-6133. [The MindBody Connection][min1] is located in the Atterbury Student Success Center in Room 112 and offers a variety of stress-reduction services. 

[cou1]: http://www.umkc.edu/counselingcenter
[stu2]: http://info.umkc.edu/studenthealth/
[min1]: http://www.umkc.edu/mindbody

#### Educational Environment/Policies

All educational records are protected by FERPA (Family Education Rights and Privacy Act) as described in the University Collected Rules and Regulations, section 180.020 Student Records. If you have questions or would like more information regarding this regulation and its implementation at the [UMKC registrar webpage][reg2]

[reg2]: http://umkc.edu/registrar  

The faculty, administration, staff, and students of the University of Missouri-Kansas City are dedicated to the pursuit of knowledge and the acquisition of skills that will enable us to lead rich and full lives. We can pursue these ends only in a culture of mutual respect and civility. It is thus incumbent upon all of us to create a culture of respect everywhere on campus and at all times through our actions and speech. As a community of learners, we are committed to creating and maintaining an environment on campus that is free of all forms of harassment, intimidation, and discrimination. Any form of discrimination or coercion based on race, ethnicity, gender, class, religion, sexual orientation, age, rank, or any other characteristic will not be tolerated. Should you, a friend, or a colleague ever experience any action or speech that feels coercive or discriminatory, you should report this immediately to Dr. Allsworth or to Cynthia Ginn, Office of the Dean, UMKC School of Medicine (email: ginnc@umkc.edu; telephone +1-816-235-6251), and/or the Affirmative Action Office. The Affirmative Action Office, which is ultimately responsible for investigating all complaints of discrimination or sexual harassment, is located at 218A Administrative Center, 5115 Oak Street; the office may be contacted at +1-816-235-1323. All formal complaints will be investigated and appropriate action taken.

There are a number of factors that can affect communication between a student and faculty member including English Language Proficiency, communication style (direct vs indirect), receptive or expressive preference (verbal, written). If a student has difficulty understanding information or completing assignments due to communication problems they should speak with the course instructor. If the issue is not resolved, the student should contact the Chairman of the Department.

#### Academic Inquiry, Course Discussion and Privacy

University of Missouri System Executive Order No. 38 lays out principles regarding the sanctity of classroom discussions at the university. The policy is described fully in Section 200.015 of the Collected Rules and Regulations. In this class, students may make audio or video recordings of course activity unless specifically prohibited by the faculty member. However, the redistribution of any audio or video recordings of statements or comments from the course to individuals who are not students in the course is prohibited without the express permission of the faculty member and of any students who are recorded, including those recordings prepared by an instructor. Students found to have violated this policy are subject to discipline in accordance with provisions of Section 200.020 of the Collected Rules and Regulations of the University of Missouri pertaining to student conduct matters. 

#### Intellectual Property

The course materials provided through this course, including but not limited to, PowerPoint slides, Canvas screen shots, class hand-outs, audio and video presentations, and the course syllabus are the instructor’s intellectual property and are protected by copyright law. You may download and make copies of course materials for your own use. You are not allowed to publicly reproduce or distribute these materials or enable others to do so without the instructor’s written consent. Failure to comply with this direction may constitute a violation of the Student Conduct Code, section 200.010, Collected Rules and Regulations of the University of Missouri. For more information, refer to the [University of Missouri System Rules and Regulations page][rul1].

[rul1]: http://www.umsystem.edu/ums/rules/.

#### Students with Disabilities

To obtain disability related accommodations and/or auxiliary aids, students with disabilities must contact the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities (OSSD) as soon as possible. To contact OSSD call +1-816-235-5696. Once verified, OSSD will notify the course instructor and outline the accommodation and/or auxiliary aids to be provided. For more information go to the [UMKC Disability Resources page][dis1].

[dis1]: http://www.umkc.edu/disability/

#### Statement of Human Rights

The Board of Curators and UMKC are committed to the policy of equal opportunity, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability and status as a Vietnam era veteran. Commitment to the policy is mentored by the Division of Diversity, Access & Equity, but it is the responsibility of the entire university community to provide equal opportunity through relevant practices, initiatives and programs. 

#### Title IX

Under the University of Missouri’s Title IX policy, discrimination, violence and harassment based on sex, gender, and gender identity are subject to the same kinds of accountability and support applied to offenses based on other protected characteristics such as race, color, ethnic or national origin, sexual orientation, religion, age, ancestry, disability, military status, and veteran status. If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources by visiting [UMKC’s Title IX Office webpage][tit1] (http://info.umkc.edu/title9/) or contacting UMKC’s Title IX Coordinator, KC Atchinson, JD (+1-816-235-6705) or atchinsonk@umkc.edu ).  Additionally, you can file a complaint using [UMKC’s Asynchronous Online discrimination complaint form][tit2].

[tit1]: http://info.umkc.edu/title9/
[tit2]: https://info.umkc.edu/title9/makingareport/

While most UMKC employees are required to report any known or suspected violation of Title IX, students may seek confidential guidance from the following campus locations:

-   UMKC Counseling Service, Volker Campus
    -   4825 Troost Ave, Suite 206
    -   Kansas City, MO 64110
    -   Phone: (816) 235-1635
-   UMKC Counseling Service, Health Sciences Campus
    -   Health Sciences Building 1418
    -   2464 Charlotte
    -   Kansas City, MO 64108
    -   Phone: (816) 235-1635
-   Student Health and Wellness
    -   4825 Troost Ave., Suite 115
    -   Kansas City, MO 64110
    -   Phone: (816) 235-6133

### Course Schedule

This schedule is tentative and subject to change. Keep your eyes on the Canvas site and the overview page for each module.

1.  Foundations
    -   Foundations of statistics
        -   Measurement scales
        -   Null hypothesis significance training
        -   Sources of bias
    -   Introduction to R and RStudio
    -   Read introductory sections and Chapters 1, 2, 3, and 6.

2.  Univariate statistics
    -   Visualization
        -   Histograms
        -   Normal probability plots
    -   Basic univariate statistics
        -   Proportions
        -   Means, standard deviations
        -   Percentiles
    -   Read Chapter 5.

3.  Simple inferences
    -   Confidence intervals
        -   Mean
        -   Proportion
    -   Hypothesis test
        -   Mean
        -   Proportion
    -   Reading assignments from outside your book (to be determined)

4.  Correlation
    -   Visualization
        -   Scatterplots
    -   Pearson correlation
        -   Confidence intervals
        -   Hypothesis tests
    -   Alternatives
        -   Point biserial correlation
        -   Phi coefficient
    -   Read Chapter 8.

5.  Linear regression, part 1
    -   Visualization
        -   Scatterplots
    -   Regression with a continuous predictor
        -   Residuals
        -   Analysis of variance table
        -   R-squared
    -   Read Sections 9.1 to 9.8
    
6.  Linear regression, part 2
    -   Visualization
        -   Histogram
        -   Normal probability plot
    -   Checking the regression assumptions
        -   Normality
        -   Heterogeneity
        -   Independence
    -   Identifying influential data points
    -   Read Sections 9.1 to 9.8 again

7.  Linear regression, part 3
    -   Visualization
        -   Boxplots
    -   Categorical predictors
        -   Indicator variables
    -   Multiple predictors
        -   Interpretation
        -   Collinearity
    -   Read Sections 9.9 to 9.11, 9.14 to 9.17
    
8. Two group comparisons, part 1
    -   Visualization
        -   Bar/line plots with error bars
        -   Boxplots
    -   Two sample t-test
        -   Assumptions
        -   Sample size calculation
        -   Relationship to linear regression
    -   Read Sections 10.1 to 10.8
    
9. Two group comparisons, part 2
    -   Visualization
        -   Line plots
    -   Paired t-test
        -   Assumptions
        -   Sample size calculation
        
10. Analysis of variance, part 1
    -   One factor analysis of variance
        -   Analysis of variance table
        -   Post hoc comparisons
    -   Read Sections 12.1 to 12.7

11. Analysis of variance, part 2
    -   Assumptions
    -   Sample size calculation
    -   Alternatives
        -   Kruskal-Wallis test
        -   Bayesian analysis of variance
    -   Reading assignments from outside your book (to be determined)
        
12. Analysis of variance, part 3
    -   Visualization
        -   Bar/line graph with error bars
        -   Boxplots
    -   Two factor analysis of variance
        -   Sequential and partial sums of squares
        -   Interactions
    -   Read Sections 14.1 to 14.7
    
13.  Categorical outcomes, part 1
    -   Row versus column percents
    -   Odds ratio versus relative risk
    -   Chi-square tests
    -   Read Chapter 19

14.  Categorical outcomes, part 2
    -   Logistic regression
    -   Read Chapter 20

15. Review

There will be written assignments on most weeks. Two major projects are a data collection involving M&M candies and a data analysis using data that you find on your own.
 
### Midterm project

You will find a dataset that has not been used in this class and prepare a data analysis involving a linear regression model. This includes a data dictionary and a five minute oral presentation.

### Final project

The purpose of this project is to provide the student with an independent learning opportunity to apply the statistical concepts and methodology to a set of their own data. With this project, the student will:

-   Generate a research question of interest to the student.
-   Write the null hypothesis for this research question.
-   Write the research hypothesis for this research question.
-   Use a set of data that was generated by the student to answer this research question.
-   Select appropriate statistical analysis methods that would be used to answer the research question. The statistical analysis method(s) must include concepts and methods taught in this course (MEDB5501).
-   Analyze the data using the selected statistical analysis methods.
-   Interpret the statistical analysis output.
-   Create a write-up of the “Results and Analysis” of this data set.

This data set should be actual collected data from a research project that the student is or was involved with. Should the student not have data from a research project, the student will be given access to several data sets from which to choose. Please Note: This should be a “last resort”. Try to find data online, through your own research or from research from associates. 

The final paper should include at a minimum:

-   the data set,
-   all SPSS analysis output,
-   any appropriate tables and graphs 
-   the research question/hypothesis
-   a description and justification of your choice of the analysis methods used,
-   a results and analysis section including all of your findings and the statistical conclusion(s) obtained written in manuscript form.

Important Dates:

-   End of week 11, data set due to instructor via Canvas
-   End of week 14, final project due to instructor via Canvas

A grading rubric will be provided to the student to aid in their development of this project. This is a major project and will show your ability to apply the statistical concepts presented in this course. All students should begin considering their data set for this project early in the semester.

A Semester Project Module will be included in the Canvas Course Site. All related materials will be included.
