---
title: "Syllabus"
format:
  html: 
    embed-resources: true
editor: source
---

## MEDB 5502, Sections 0001, 0002, 0003

### Applied Biostatistics II, 3 credit hours

Synchronous zoom: Tu 1:00PM - 3:45PM
MEDB 5502-0001 (12192) 
Applied Biostatistics II (Lecture)
2 students

Asynchronous:
MEDB 5502-0002 (12961)
Applied Biostatistics II (Lecture)
16 students
 	
In person attendance: Tu 1:00PM - 3:45PM
MEDB 5502-0003 (16153)
Applied Biostatistics II (Lecture)
0 students

## Introduction

Clinical research has been critical for the development of new medications and treatments. Now, clinical research carries an increasingly important role as it contributes to critical issues facing our health care system. In order for clinical research to address these issues, appropriate methods for data processing and analysis must be conducted. The Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics Biostatistics sequence has been designed to provide students with the applied knowledge and skills they will need in order to contribute to the creation, analysis, and understanding of data generated by clinical and patient care studies. 

## Prerequisites

Only Graduate level students (students holding a BS or BA or higher degree) are permitted to register for this course and Prior Statistics coursework with a passing grade of B or higher and a grade of 80% or better on a placement exam administered by the course director for MEDB5502 or completion of MEDB 5501 with a passing grade of B- or higher.

This course is the second course in the Biostatistics sequence and is intended for students, physicians, and researchers in the biological, clinical and medical fields, and medical education. This course introduces statistical concepts, analysis methods, and research designs for applied data commonly encountered in the biological, clinical and medical research. Topics include diagnostic testing, hypothesis testing, power analysis, analysis of variance, analysis of covariance, multivariate analysis of variance, propensity scoring, simple and multiple regression, logistic regression, survival analysis, and evidence based medicine. Familiarity with the basic statistics and statistical techniques presented in Biostatistics I is required. Statistical analyses involved in this course will be performed primarily using the SPSS statistical analysis package. The course will also cover the interpretation, presentation and the write up of analytical results and graphs.

## Course Objectives

The Biostatistics sequence (MEDB5501 and 5502) will provide students with an understanding of basic and more advanced concepts in statistics as applied to health sciences. The objective of this course, MEDB5502, is to equip students with knowledge of advanced biostatistics methods for designing studies and analyzing data from biomedical, clinical, and public health research studies. This course will provide students a foundation for evaluating outcomes of medical and clinical research as well as prepare them to be intelligent consumers of the health research literature. This course will also provide a firm foundation for more advanced and specialized statistical analysis course work if pursued. 

## Student Learning Objectives

At the end of this course, students will be able to:
-   Understand and implement the statistical concepts behind diagnostic testing
-   Manage and analyze data sets in order to test research hypotheses
-   Estimate and summarize data characteristics in order to determine appropriate statistical analysis methods
-   Apply statistical methods for analyzing continuous data, specifically analysis of variance, analysis of covariance, multivariate analysis of variance, linear regression, and multiple regression
-   Apply statistical methods for analyzing categorical data, such as logistic regression, survival analysis, and other nonparametric statistical methods
-   Understanding the theory of propensity score generation as well as its application to research design
-   Understand the principles of Evidence Based Medicine
-   Apply the statistical knowledge gained in this course in a practical manner
-   Undertake further study of statistics if desired

## Course Framework

There is a long tradition of data management and statistical analysis as applied to research on various health topics from multi-center drug development trials to clinical outcomes studies to small sample clinical research.  Understanding the statistical analysis methods required to conduct valid research is critical as clinical research plays an increasingly significant role in the evolution of our health care system. Results from clinical research studies contribute not only to the development of new drugs, devices and treatments but also to the determination of the best treatments for health care providers to offer patients (best practice).  The readings, assignments, quizzes, semester project, and midterm and final exams in this course are designed to be relevant to the application of the knowledge and skills gained in MEDB5502 to clinical, biomedical, and public health research.   

## Instructors

-   Suman Sahil
    -   816-235-1812
    -   sumans@umkc.edu
    
-   Steve Simon
    -   816-235-6617
    -   simons@umkc.edu
    
Both of our offices are located in the Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, School of Medicine, M5- 100. 

## Office hours

-   There will be one hour review sessions on Zoom, Fridays at 11:30am and Mondays at 12:30pm. Individual meetings are also available by appointment. Most meetings will be handled by Zoom, but face-to-face meetings are also possible.

## Synchronous Zoom Section (0001)

You must show up for class via zoom on Tuesdays from 1:00pm to 3:45pm. You may be excused from attendance a limited number of times with appropriate notice in advance.

## Asynchronous section (0002)

You will watch video recordings of the Tuesday sessions, which will be available by Wednesday at noon. You are welcomed and encouraged to attend the Zoom session on Tuesdays, should your schedule and time permit. 

## In person section (0003)

You must show up for class via zoom on Tuesdays from 1:00pm to 3:45pm. You may be excused from attendance a limited number of times with appropriate notice in advance. You must also sign an attendance sheet in person weekly. This sheet is available in the School of Medicine building, room M5-100.

## Students in all sections

All students must participate in discussion boards and complete programming assignments in a timely fashion. 

You should complete programming assignments by the following Monday at 11:59pm. It is very important to keep the class progressing at more or less the same pace. If you need an extension on any deadline, please refer to the [policy on extensions and rework][ext1].

[ext1]: https://github.com/pmean/classes/blob/master/biostats-2/general/policy-on-extensions-and-rework.md

You will have quizzes to complete every week and a final exam to complete at the end of the semester. You are welcome to review any notes, review any videos, or find resources on the web during the quizzes or final. You can ask for assistance from any computerized resource (Google, Siri, ChatGPT, etc.), but you cannot ask for assistance from any live person.

You are expected to run your own programs in SPSS or other statistical software, but if you need help resolving an error message, you can ask for assistance from your instructors, from other students or from any other person who is willing to help. You must write the interpretations of the SPSS output by yourself.

Please review the required readings prior to the Tuesday Zoom class or prior to watching the recorded videos.

The student’s grade for the class will be based on the percentage of possible points the student has earned. A letter grade will be assigned based on the following scale:

|% of Possible Points|Letter Grade|GPA Equivalent|
|--------------------|------------|--------------|
| 94 – 100           | A          |	4.0          |
| 90 – 93            | A-         |	3.7          |
| 87 – 89            | B+         |	3.3          |
| 84 – 86            | B          |	3.0          |
| 80 - 83            | B-         |	2.7          |
| 77 – 79            | C+         |	2.3          |
| 74 - 76            | C          |	2.0          |
| 70 - 73            | C-         |	1.7          |
| 67 - 69            | D+         |	1.3          |
| 64 – 66            | D          |	1.0          |
| 60 - 63            | D-         |	0.7          |
| < 60               | F          |	0            |

If a student feels that he/she has been unfairly graded, information on the appeal process can be found in the academic regulations information (http://www.umkc.edu/catalog/Procedure_for_Appeal_of_Grades.html).

## Course Evaluation 

You will be asked to complete a confidential evaluation at the end of the semester on this course and your instructors. The evaluation will be completed through REDCap.

## Required Reading 

The required text book for this course is 

Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics North American Edition: 5th Edition. Andy Field. Sage Publications. ISBN-13: 9781526436566.

## Canvas

Announcements and schedule updates, readings and all course materials will be posted on Canvas. You are REQUIRED to log onto their Canvas site and administer the course via this site. You must check Canvas frequently throughout each week for any and all communications and postings related to this course.

Many materials on the Canvas website can be read and/or printed with a standard web browser. Other items require Adobe Acrobat Reader to view.  Acrobat Reader may be downloaded for FREE from the [Adobe website][ado1]

[ado1]: http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html

## Required Technology

This course will use IBM SPSS for all programming assignments. You will have access to SPSS via the [UMKC Remote Labs Site][rem1]. For assistance with remote labs, contact UMKC Information Services at 816-235-2000.

Additionally, SPSS may already be installed on your UMKC computer. Also, SPSS can be purchased in the form of Grad Pac (Purchase the SPSS Standard 6 month license for a personal computer).

[rem1]: http://www.umkc.edu/is/remotelabs/

While most students like using SPSS, you may be interested in applying what you learn using an alternative package, such as Python, R, SAS or Stata. If you have already used one of these programs, or if you expect to use it in your future work, you are certainly welcome to answer all your programming assignments with an alternative package. These alternative packages will not be presented during the lectures, so you are expected to find out how to do these analyses on your own. You are welcome to ask for assistance by email, during one of the scheduled help sessions, or at an individual appointment. It may be difficult for your instructors to know all the details about every alternative package, but we will try our best to help. 

If a particular statistic is not available in your alternative package (this happens very rarely), please note the lack of availability in your assignment submission. You will not be penalized for any shortcoming in an alternative package.

If a statistic is not available in SPSS, this is an error on the part of your instructors. Please notify us as soon as you notice this.


## E-mail

You must use a UMKC e-mail account for correspondence in this class.  The instructor will not be responsible for the receipt of e-mails that are sent to locations other than those ending with “umkc.edu”.

## Canvas

All students are required to be registered with Canvas in order to have access to course-related material that is posted on that site. All Announcements will be posted on Canvas and the student will also receive that Announcement via their UMKC email. All students will be responsible for knowledge and /or completion of any posted Announcement directives.
UMKC Resources & Policy Statements 

Academic Calendar: Students are encouraged to review important [add, drop or withdraw dates][add1]

[add1]: http://www.umkc.edu/registrar/acal.asp 

## Academic Honesty

The Board of Curators of the University of Missouri recognizes that academic honesty is essential for the intellectual life of the University. Faculty members have a special obligation to expect high standards of academic honesty in all student work. Students have a special obligation to adhere to such standards. Academic dishonesty, including cheating, plagiarism or sabotage, is adjudicated through the University of Missouri Student Conduct Code and Rules of Procedures in Student Conduct Matters. 

Conduct for which students are subject to sanctions includes academic dishonesty, such as cheating, plagiarism, or sabotage. In the event misconduct is confirmed, the students will receive 0 points on the exam or assignment. If academic dishonesty is admitted or confirmed by evidence the faculty are required to report the incident to the Assistant Dean for Graduate Studies, who will meet with the faculty member and student to review the event and then determine whether it should be further referred to the Dean of the School of Graduate Studies.  

Students enrolled in this course assume an obligation to behave in a manner compatible with the University's function as an educational institution as described in the University Collected Rules and Regulations Chapter 200 Student Conduct, section 200.010 Standard of Conduct. Conduct for which students are subject to sanctions includes academic dishonesty, such as cheating, plagiarism, or sabotage. Conduct for which students are subject to sanctions are outlined as follows: 

The term cheating includes but is not limited to: (i) use of any unauthorized assistance in taking quizzes, tests, or examinations; (ii) dependence upon the aid of sources beyond those authorized by the instructor in writing papers, preparing reports, solving problems, or carrying out other assignments; (iii) acquisition or possession without permission of tests or other academic material belonging to a member of the University faculty or staff; or (iv) knowingly providing any unauthorized assistance to another student on quizzes, tests, or examinations. 

The term plagiarism includes, but is not limited to: (i) use by paraphrase or direct quotation of the published or unpublished work of another person without fully and properly crediting the author with footnotes, citations or bibliographical reference; (ii) unacknowledged use of materials prepared by another person or agency engaged in the selling of term papers or other academic materials; or (iii) unacknowledged use of original work/material that has been produced through collaboration with others without release in writing from collaborators. 

The term sabotage includes, but is not limited to, the unauthorized interference with, modification of, or destruction of the work or intellectual property of another member of the University community.

To ensure academic integrity and prevent plagiarism, UMKC has purchased the Internet-based Turn It In.  This site allows faculty and students to submit papers online to examine a paper’s originality. The site compares submitted papers with several proprietary algorithm databases to check for plagiarism. The course director reserves the right to have student assignments reviewed on Turnitin.com in this course.  Submissions will have all identifying student information (name, student ID number etc.) removed from the submission to ensure that student’s rights are protected.  

## Academic Inquiry, Course Discussion and Privacy

University of Missouri System Executive Order No. 38 lays out principles regarding the sanctity of classroom discussions at the university. The policy is described fully in Section 200.015 of the Collected Rules and Regulations. In this class, students may make audio or video recordings of course activity with permission from the instructor. However, the redistribution of any audio or video recordings of statements or comments from the course to individuals who are not students in the course is prohibited without the express permission of instructor and of any students who are recorded, including those recordings prepared by the instructor. Students found to have violated this policy are subject to discipline in accordance with provisions of Section 200.020 of the Collected Rules and Regulations of the University of Missouri pertaining to student conduct matters. 

## Statement on Privacy of Student Records

All educational records are protected by FERPA (Family Education Rights and Privacy Act) as described in the University Collected Rules and Regulations, section 180.020 Student Records. If you have questions or would like more information regarding this regulation and its [fer1].

[fer1]: https://www.umsystem.edu/ums/rules/collected_rules/information/ch180/180.020_student_records

## Attendance Policy

Students are expected to attend and participate in classes. Students should notify the instructor of excused absences in advance, where possible. Students who have an excused absence are expected to make arrangements with instructors for alternative or make-up work. Such arrangements should be made in advance of the absence, where possible. This attendance policy shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner. In the case of cancellation of classes due to inclement weather or other reasons, all students will follow the course calendar and complete the weekly materials using Canvas and recorded lectures. In Class and online students will be responsible for the quiz questions during those weeks. 
Campus Safety: Inclement weather, mass notification, and emergency response guide: http://www.umkc.edu/umkcalert/ 

Cancellation of classes will be posted on the front page of the [University’s website][umk1] as well as through UMKC Alert message system. At the time of this syllabus creation, the above UMKC inclement weather policy no longer applied. Courses are to be moved to online/Zoom or other mode of instruction. 

[umk1]: https://www.umkc.edu

## Statement on Expectations Regarding Student Conduct

In order to maintain a proper learning environment within the classroom, it is important for all students enrolled in this course to treat both the faculty and their peers with courtesy, civility and respect. Conduct for which students are subject to sanctions includes academic dishonesty, such as cheating, plagiarism, or sabotage. For more information regarding this regulation visit the [UM System rules on student conduct][rul1]. Students whose behavior is deemed disruptive by their instructor may be told to leave the classroom for the remainder of the session. 

[rul1]: https://www.umsystem.edu/ums/rules/collected_rules/programs/ch200 

## Counseling and Health Services Available at UMKC

UMKC students may experience many challenges in their lives while attending college – stress, depression, suicidality, trauma, relationship issues, health concerns, etc.  As your professor I care about your success and well-being, and want to make you aware of some helpful resources on campus. The [UMKC Counseling Center][cou1], located at 4825 Troost in Room 206, offers a wide range of supportive services to students. Appointments can be made by calling 816.235.1635. UMKC Student Health and Wellness (http://info.umkc.edu/studenthealth/), located at 4825 Troost in Room 115, offers a full range of health care and promotion services.  Appointments can be scheduled online or by calling 816.235.6133. The Mind-Body Connection (www.umkc.edu/mindbody) is located in the Atterbury Student Success Center in Room 112 and offers a variety of stress-reduction services. 

[cou1]: https://www.umkc.edu/counselingcenter

Disability Support Services: To obtain disability related accommodations and/or auxiliary aids, students with disabilities must contact the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities (OSSD) as soon as possible. To contact OSSD, call (816) 235-5696.  Once verified, OSSD will notify the course instructor and outline the accommodation and/or auxiliary aids to be provided.  For more information go to: http://www.umkc.edu/disability/ 

English Proficiency Statement: Students who encounter difficulty in their courses because of the English proficiency of their instructors should speak directly with their instructors. If additional assistance is needed, students may contact the UMKC Help Line at 816-235-2222 for assistance.

Grade Appeal Policy: Students are responsible for meeting the standards of academic performance established for each course in which they are enrolled. The establishment of the criteria for grades and the evaluation of student academic performance are the responsibilities of the instructor. 
The University grade appeal procedure is available only for the review of allegedly capricious grading and not for review of the instructor's evaluation of the student's academic performance. Capricious grading, as that term is used here, comprises any of the following: 
• The assignment of a grade to a particular student on some basis other than the performance in the course; 
• The assignment of a grade to a particular student according to more exacting or demanding standards than were applied to other students in the course; (Note: Additional or different grading criteria may be applied to graduate students enrolled for graduate credit in 300- and 400-level courses.) 
• The assignment of a grade by a substantial departure from the instructor's previously announced standards. 
Students who have concerns about this course should first consult with the specific instructor with whom there is a problem. If the issues are not satisfactorily resolved the student should contact the course director. In the event a student would like to appeal a course grade they must follow the School of Medicine procedure for grade appeal for graduate courses, which is outlined in the student handbook or can be found at: http://med.umkc.edu/councils/graduate/documents/

Discrimination Grievance Procedures for Students: Discrimination Grievance Procedures for Students can be found here: http://www.umsystem.edu/ums/rules/collected_rules/grievance/ch390/grievance_390.010
 
The course faculty is committed to creating and maintaining a supportive learning environment. If at any time you find yourself in an environment that does not support learning, it is best to first contact the course faculty.  If faculty members are unable to resolve the situation for you, you may contact: The Chair of the Department, the Associate Dean for Student Affairs, Dr. Brenda Rogers, SOM Rm M4-207, rogersbr@umkc.edu, (816) 235-1782; Sam Turner, Office of Diversity & Community Partnership, SOM Rm. M1-109, (816) 235-1780.

Statement of Human Rights: The Board of Curators and UMKC are committed to the policy of equal opportunity, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability and status as a Vietnam era veteran. Commitment to the policy is mentored by the Division of Diversity, Access & Equity, but it is the responsibility of the entire university community to provide equal opportunity through relevant practices, initiatives and programs. 

Title IX: Under the University of Missouri’s Title IX policy, discrimination, violence and harassment based on sex, gender, and gender identity are subject to the same kinds of accountability and support applied to offenses based on other protected characteristics such as race, color, ethnic or national origin, sexual orientation, religion, age, ancestry, disability, military status, and veteran status. If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources by visiting UMKC’s Title IX Office webpage (http://info.umkc.edu/title9/) or contacting UMKC’s Title IX Coordinator, Sybil B. Wyatt, JD, EdD, MS (816.235.6910 or wyattsb@umkc.edu). 

While most UMKC employees are required to report any known or suspected violation of Title IX, students may seek confidential guidance from the following campus locations:

UMKC Counseling Service
Volker Campus
4825 Troost Ave, Suite 206
Kansas City, MO 64110
Phone – (816) 235-1635	UMKC Counseling Service
Health Sciences Campus
Health Sciences Building 1418
2464 Charlotte
Kansas City, MO 64108
Phone – (816) 235-1635
(open Tuesdays, 1-5pm)	Student Health and Wellness
4825 Troost Ave., Suite 115
Kansas City, MO 64110
Phone - (816) 235-6133



## Topics

The second in the Applied Biostatistics sequence and is intended for graduate, doctoral, and professional students in the biological, clinical and medical fields, and medical education. Statistical concepts, analysis methods, and research designs commonly used in these fields are included: diagnostic testing, hypothesis testing, power analysis, analysis of variance, analysis of covariance, multivariate analysis of variance, propensity scoring, simple and multiple regression, logistic regression, and survival analysis. Familiarity with basic statistics and the statistical techniques presented in Applied Biostatistics I is required. Statistical analyses involved in this course will be performed primarily using the SPSS statistical analysis package. The course will also cover the interpretation, presentation and the write up of analytical results and graphs.

### (Wk 01) Review

<--Originally "Introduction and Information"-->

-   Correlation (Chapter 8)
-   Simple linear regression (Sections 9.1 through 9.7)
-   Independent-samples and paired t-test (Chapter 10)
-   One factor analysis of variance (Chapter 12)


### (Wk 02) Multiple linear regression (Sections 9.8 through 9.11) and mediation analysis (Section 11.4)

<--Originally "Diagnostic testing"-->


-   Learning objectives
    -   List the differences and similarities between Simple Linear Regression and Multiple Regression
    -   Write the Null and Alternative Hypotheses for a  Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Write the research question for a multiple regression analysis
    -   Identify the variable type for the Outcome Variable in a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Identify the variable type(s) for the Predictor Variables in a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Write the equation form for a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Define Linear Combination
    -   Define the conditions for which Multiple Regression analysis would be applied
    -   Identify and detail what must be considered before running a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Explain the Rule of 15
    -   Calculate the sample size for a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   List the assumptions that must be met for a Multiple Regression analysis to proceed
    -   Define: multicollinearity and homoscedasticity of residuals
    -   List the methods used to assess for all assumptions
    -   Explain why multicollinearity should never be present between the variables used in a Multiple Regressions Analysis
    -   List and explain the methods of variable entry into an Multiple Regression model
    -   List and Explain the methods of cross-validation of a Multiple Regression model
    -   Explain how predictor variables are selected for inclusion in a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   List all of the pertinent output found for a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Define: Variance Inflation Factors and Tolerance
    -   Relate Variance Inflation Factors and Tolerance
    -   Define the interpretation of Variance Inflation Factors and Tolerance
    -   Explain the use of Cooks Influence
    -   List and define R, R squared and Adjusted R squared
    -   Explain the meaning of the ANOVA table generated in a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Explain the difference between the standardized and unstandardized Beta Coefficients
    -   Interpret the Unstandardized Beta Coefficients from a Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Explain which predictors are included int he resultant Multiple Regression model
    -   Completely write up a Multiple Regression analysis

### (Wk 03) Analysis of covariance (Chapter 13)

<--Originally "Correlation, Regression, Power analysis"-->

-   Learning objectives
    -   Explain when an ANCOVA would be used to analyze data
    -   Explain the purpose of including covariates in an ANCOVA
    -   Identify the impact of controlling for a covariate on variance, power and the F-ratio
    -   Explain the data requirements for an ANCOVA
    -   Set up a data set for an ANCOVA
    -   Write a research question forn ANCOVA
    -   Write the Null and Research Hypotheses for an ANCOVA
    -   List the assumptions for an ANCOVA
    -   Explain the tests for the assumptions for an ANCOVA
    -   Run the assumptions tests for an ANCOVA
    -   Interpret the assumptions tests for an ANCOVA
    -   Run a complete ANCOVA
    -   Explain, using output, how to note the influence of the covariate
    -   Summarize the interpretation of an ANCOVA

### (Wk 04) Multifactor analysis of variance (Chapter 14) and moderator analysis (Section 11.3)

<--Originally "Multiple regression"-->

-   Learning objectives for multifactor ANOVA
    -   Define Factor
    -   Define Level
    -   Assess types of ANOVA based on factors and levels
    -   Calculate the maximum number of groups in a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Define interaction
    -   Explain how to determine if an interaction between the factors exists
    -   Explain how to "name" a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Write the Null and Alternative Hypothesis for a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Write the Research Questions for a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Write the Research Interaction Questions for a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Define and explain the order of interpretation for a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Define Main Effects
    -   Explain the test of the Main Effects
    -   Define Simple Main Effects
    -   Explain the test of the Simple Main Effects
    -   Define Interaction Effect
    -   Explain the test of the Interaction Effect
    -   Explain what information the Interaction Effect test provides
    -   Explain the difference in information obtained between a 2-way ANOVA and 2 one way ANOVA's
    -   Define the  "Differences Between the Differences"
    -   Calculate the "Differences Between the Differences"
    -   Draw conclusions about the "Differences Between the Differences"
    -   Interpret the Interaction Effect test
    -   Determine the next steps of interpretation with a significant interaction effect
    -   Determine the next steps of interpretation with a non-significant interaction effect
    -   Interpret the Main Effects
    -   Interpret the Simple Main Effects
    -   List and define the Assumptions  and tests for a multi-factorial ANOVA
    -   Define Marginal Means
    -   Explain the difference between Marginal Means and Means
    -   Complete a statistical write-up of a multi-factorial ANOVA with all elements included
    
### (Wk 05) Factor analysis (Chapter 18)

<--Originally "Logistic regression"-->

### (Wk 06) Logistic regression (Chapter 20)

<--Originally "Survival analysis"-->

-   Learning objectives
    -   Define Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Compare and Contrast Multiple Regression analysis and Logistic Regression analysis
    -   List and define the three types of logistic Regression analysis
    -   Define how predictor variables are selected
    -   Define Multicollinearity
    -   List and explain the problems that Multicollinearity causes if present in a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   List and explain the methods for selecting predictor variables
    -   List and explain the problems that too many predictors can cause  in a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Compare and contrast Logistic Regression analysis with Linear and Multiple Regression analysis
    -   Explain the model equation for a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Explain the problem with the Assumption of Linearity  for a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Explain the method that is used to overcome the problem with the Assumption of Linearity
    -   Define Maximum Likelihood Estimation
    -   Explain Probability
    -   Explain Odds
    -   Explain the conversion of probability to odds
    -   Define and explain the model equation for a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Define reference standard
    -   Identify the value that represents the fit of the model
    -   Define Log likelihood
    -   List and define the 4 different calculations for R squared for an Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Define and explain the Wald Statistic
    -   Explain the importance of Odds Ratios in a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Identify Exp(B)
    -   Identify and define the methods for predictor variable input in a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Understand which predictor variable input method is best used
    -   Identify, define and explain the testing for all assumptions
    -   Identify and explain all "Important Considerations" for a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Calculate Sensitivity, Specificity, PPV and NPV using the information found in the SPSS Classification Table
    -   Explain the meaning of Block 0
    -   Explain the meaning of all subsequent blocks (following Block 0) in a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Interpret an Odds Ratio for a continuous predictor variable
    -   Interpret an Odds Ratio for a categorical predictor variable
    -   Calculate the sensitivity and specificity of the model
    -   Explain what an ROC identifies in a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Create a complete write up for a Logistic Regression analysis
    -   Know the table that must be included in a write up for a Logistic Regression analysis

### (Wk 07) Diagnostic testing (not in Field)

<--Originally "Propensity scores"-->

-   Learning objectives
    -   Create a 2 x 2 contingency table for a diagnostic Test
    -   Define Gold Standard
    -   Define and calculate Sensitivity, Specificity, Positive and Negative Predictive Values and Positive and Negative Likelihood ratios.
    -   Define True Positive Rate
    -   Define True Negative Rate
    -   Define True Positive, True Negative, False Positive and False Negative values
    -   Identify True Positive, True Negative, False Positive and False Negative values in a contingency table.
    -   Define Prevalence
    -   Calculate Disease Prevalence
    -   Define and Calculate Positive and Negative Likelihood ratios
    -   Compare and Contrast Likelihood ratios and Predictive Values
    -   Define and explain Pre-test Probability
    -   Define and explain Post-test Probability
    -   Define the Fagan Nomogram
    -   Demonstrate correct use of a Fagan Nomogram
    -   Define a Receiver Operator Curve
    -   Explain the x axis and y axis of a Receiver Operator Curve
    -   Create a Receiver Operator Curve using SPSS or SAS and by "hand"
    -   Interpret a Receiver Operator Curve
    -   Compare two or more diagnostic tests on a Receiver Operator Curve
    -   Define the "C" statistic
    -   Define Area under the Curve

### (Wk 08) Propensity scores (not in Field)

<--Originally "Evidence Based Medicine"-->

-   Learning objectives
    -   Define Propensity Score
    -   Define propensity Score Matching
    -   Explain the main reason for the use of propensity scores
    -   Explain the use of Propensity Scores for a Treatment-Control Study
    -   List the 3 relationship between the covariate, the Outcome Variable and the Treatment assignment
    -   Define the 3 relationship between the covariate, the Outcome Variable and the Treatment assignment
    -   State the "biggest" challenge of Propensity Score calculation
    -   Define the most important step in Propensity Score calculation
    -   Explain the mathematical theory of the Propensity Score
    -   List and define the Assumptions for Propensity Score calculation
    -   Explain the problem of a Propensity Score of 0 or 1
    -   Explain the Area of Common Support
    -   Explain the need for an ideal  number of covariates for the Propensity Score calculation
    -   Explain the selection of covariates for Propensity Score Calculation
    -   List and explain the methods for matching groups using Propensity Scores
    -   List and explain the limitations/concerns of using Propensity Scores
    -   Explain the benefits of Propensity Score Matching over using a regression model for covariate control.
    -   Explain the benefits of using a regression model over Propensity Score Matching for covariate control.

### (Wk 09) Survival analysis (not in Field)

<--Originally "Midterm exam"-->

-   Kaplan-Meyer - Survival Analysis
    -   Define Survival Analysis
    -   List the scientific applications of Survival Analysis
    -   Know the general overview of Survival Analysis
    -   Identify the type of data used in Survival Analysis
    -   Identify data requirements for Survival Analysis
    -   Identify the research design for a Survival Analysis
    -   List the benefits of Survival Analysis
    -   Define "censoring"
    -   Define "event observation"
    -   Outline the history of Survival Analysis
    -   Define "Life Tables"
    -   List the characteristics of Kaplan-Meier Survival Analysis
    -   List and define the assumptions of The Kaplan-Meier method
    -   Explain how to test Assumption #6 - Censorship equality
    -   Define "left censoring"
    -   Define "right censoring"
    -   Define the 2 goals of the Kaplan-Meier method
    -   Define the characteristic of the Event Status variable
    -   Define the characteristic of the Time variable
    -   Define the Subject Identifier variable
    -   Define the Between Subjects Factor
    -   Run a Kaplan-Meier analysis using SPSS
    -   Define and explain the Log-Rank Test, the Breslow test and the Tarone-Ware test.
    -   Interpret a Survival Functions Plot
    -   Identify the median survival values on a Survival Functions Plot
    -   Interpret the median values of a Kaplan-Meier Survival analysis
    -   Identify the useful functions of a survival distribution
    -   Explain the pair wise comparisons generated in a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
    -   Create a complete write-up of a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
-   Cox Regression
    -   Define Cox Regression
    -   Explain what a Cox Regression analysis is used for
    -   Compare and contrast a Cox Regression analysis and a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
    -   Identify the benefits of a Cox Regression analysis
    -   Define Hazard Function
    -   Explain the Cox Regression Equation
    -   Define "maximum Likelihood"
    -   Interpret a positive regression coefficient and a negative regression coefficient
    -   Compare and contrast the interpretation of a  Cox Regression analysis and a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
    -   Identify the assumptions of a Cox Regression analysis
    -   Define the Proportional Hazards assumption
    -   Explain how to test the Proportional Hazards assumption
    -   Explain what will occur if the Proportional Hazards assumption is violated
    -   Run a Cox Regression analysis in SPSS
    -   Interpret the Omnibus Tests of Model Coefficients
    -   Interpret the Beta coefficients of a Cox Regression analysis
    -   Interpret the Hazard Function Curve
    -   Create a complete write-up of a Cox Regression analysis

### (Wk 10) Imputation of missing data (not in Field)

<--Originally "ANOVA - Review and new"-->

### (Wk 11) Meta-analysis (not in Field)

<--Originally "Multifactorial analysis"-->

### (Wk 12) Mixed models (Chapters 15, 16, 21)

<--Originally "2-Way Repeated Measures ANOVA and ANCOVA"-->

-   Learning objectives for mixed models
    -   Set up a data set for a Repeated Measures ANOVA
    -   Explain when a n-way RM ANOVA would be used to analyze data
    -   Explain the data requirements for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Write a research question for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Write the Null and Research Hypotheses for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Run a complete n-way RM ANOVA
    -   List the assumptions for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Explain the tests for the assumptions for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Run the assumptions tests for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Interpret the assumptions tests for a n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Explain the issue that arises if the assumption of sphericity is violated
    -   Explain how the Epsilon correction works
    -   Explain the condition of a significant interaction effect
    -   Explain the process to run simple main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA
    -   Run simple main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA
    -   Interpret simple main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA
    -   Explain the special considerations for simple main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA with a factor with >2 levels
    -   Explain the process to run  main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA
    -   Run main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA
    -   Interpret main effects for a Repeated Measures n-way ANOVA
    -   Summarize the output of a complete n-way RM ANOVA
    -   Define the meaning of mixed model
    -   Define Between Subjects in relation to the mixed model
    -   Define Within Subjects in relation to the mixed model
    -   Be familiar with the various names for a mixed model ANOVA
    -   List the purpose of running a mixed model ANOVA
    -   Identify Between and Within factors for a mixed model ANOVA
    -   List the type of data that can be used to define the levels in a mixed model ANOVA
    -   List the assumptions for a mixed model ANOVA
    -   Successfully run the statistical analysis tests for the assumptions of a mixed model ANOVA
    -   Interpret the statistical analysis tests for the assumptions of a mixed model ANOVA
    -   Explain how normality of the data is assessed
    -   Explain the rules for violation of the assumption of homogeneity of variances
    -   Define Homogeneity of Covariances
    -   Identify Box's Test
    -   Develop a research question for a mixed model ANOVA
    -   Write the Null and Alternative for a mixed model ANOVA
    -   Set up data for a mixed model ANOVA in the SPSS data editor
    -   Run a two-way mixed model ANOVA analysis using SPSS
    -   Interpret the output of a two-way mixed model ANOVA analysis
    -   Understand the process of determining the presence or not of an interaction effect
    -   Define Simple Main Effects
    -   Determine when Simple Main Effects would be run
    -   Define Main Effects
    -   Determine when  Main Effects would be run
    -   Run the Simple Main Effects following a decision about the interaction effect
    -   Interpret the Simple Main Effects
    -   Run the Main Effects following a decision about the interaction effect
    -   Interpret the Main Effects
    -   Interpret Pair-Wise comparisons
    -   Create a complete write up of a mixed model ANOVA analysis

### (Wk 13) Bayesian analysis (scattered throughout Field)

<--Originally "Mixed model ANOVA"-->

### (Wk 14) Cluster analysis

<--Originally "MANOVA"-->

<--Module 15, originally "Scenarios"-->

